Start with data stream lifecycle documentation (#95326)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/dlm/tutorial-manage-new-data-stream.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[[tutorial-manage-new-data-stream]]
=== Tutorial: Create a managed data stream

preview::[]

To create a data stream managed by {dlm-init}, follow these steps:

. <<create-lifecycle-component-template>>
. <<create-index-template-with-lifecycle>>
. <<create-data-stream-with-lifecycle>>

[discrete]
[[create-lifecycle-component-template]]

> ==== Create a lifecycle component template

Author: I think so, let's make it more to the point :)

still match one of your template's index patterns.
+
[source,console]
----
PUT _data_stream/my-data-stream
----
// TEST[continued]

. By <<add-documents-to-a-data-stream,indexing requests>> that
target the stream's name. This name must match one of your index template's index patterns.
+
[source,console]
----
PUT my-data-stream/_bulk
{ "create":{ } }
{ "@timestamp": "2099-05-06T16:21:15.000Z", "message": "192.0.2.42 - - [06/May/2099:16:21:15 +0000] \"GET /images/bg.jpg HTTP/1.0\" 200 24736" }
{ "create":{ } }
{ "@timestamp": "2099-05-06T16:25:42.000Z", "message": "192.0.2.255 - - [06/May/2099:16:25:42 +0000] \"GET /favicon.ico HTTP/1.0\" 200 3638" }
----
// TEST[continued]

You can use the <<dlm-get-lifecycle,get data stream lifecycle API>> to see the data lifecycle of your data stream.

[source,console]
----
GET _data_stream/my-data-stream/_lifecycle
----
// TEST[continued]

The result will look like this:

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "data_streams": [
    {
      "name": "my-data-stream",<1>
      "lifecycle": {
        "data_retention": "7d" <2>
      }
    }
  ]
}
----
<1> The name of your data stream.

> <2> The retention period of the data indexed in this data stream, this means that the data in this data stream will

Author: Yes, we can , I wasn't sure if we want to introduce this yet or if we want to have a troubleshooting page for the explain API. What do you think? Should we do a small intro here and leave the troubleshooting page for later?

> <2> The retention period of the data indexed in this data stream, this means that the data in this data stream will

Reviewer: Thanks for adding it

--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

[discrete]
[[retrieve-lifecycle-information]]
==== Retrieve lifecycle information

You can use the <<dlm-get-lifecycle,get data stream lifecycle API>> to see the data lifecycle of your data stream and
the <<dlm-explain-lifecycle,explain data lifecycle>> to see the exact state of each backing index.

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
GET _data_stream/my-data-stream/_lifecycle
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

The result will look like this:

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "data_streams": [
    {
      "name": "my-data-stream",<1>
      "lifecycle": {
        "data_retention": "7d" <2>
      }
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
<1> The name of your data stream.
<2> The retention period of the data indexed in this data stream, this means that the data in this data stream will
be kept at least for 7 days. After that {es} can delete it at its own discretion.

> If you want to see more information about how the individual backing indices are managed by {dlm-init} use the
> following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to see more information about how the individual backing indices are managed by {dlm-init} use the
<<dlm-explain-lifecycle,explain data lifecycle>> API:
```
